I brought him down here, met with the president and
everybody else and the Board of Regents. And they
called the Athletic Council in with the Board of
Regents and interviewed Jackie. And I said,
Jackie, tell me. I said, how would you feel being
treated the way Tom Wilson was treated in this
process? He said, John, he said, the question is,
do you want to win or not? I mean, that's the issue
you're looking at. And I said, well, would the
Board of Regents have the control over this
appointing a football coach like they have you?
And, of course, I know Chuck Sampson and others
were backing off when I was asking this. But they
all agreed that we wanted to win. And then I'm
interviewed by CBS right out here. John McDermott
and I were asked to be interviewed about the
football coach. John said, I think it's an
unmitigated disaster that a football coach make
that much and professors are barely making it. We
don't have this and that. I said, and I didn't use my
little bite. I said, well, I don't have 80,000
people come to one of my seminars, and our board
wants to be number one in whatever we try to do. And I
got a nice teaching award the other year a while
back, and I'm not making near that much money, but I
don't draw 80,000 people to my class either. Well,
they didn't use mine, but they used John, and John
had the nice long hair, you know. Interesting
time. As far as you know, who was the person or
persons that identified Cheryl? Oh, I think
probably, if you want to look at it, certainly
McKenzie, Lindsay. in my recollection. You mean
John Lynch? Yeah. Really? Yeah. Speaker of the
House at the time. Billy Clayton. Billy Clayton.
They were some of the people that identified him
because he just had a national championship team.
He had the great quarterback that later played for
Miami Dolphins.
So you were on the athletic council? I was on the
council. We were really tied into everything
then. How long after he got here did you serve?
You know, through the time that he was dismissed.
Oh, really? See, we were called over to Bill
Mobley's office, about three of us. And the head of
the Board of Regents
called Bill while we were in the office. And this is
how I remember it. He said, we've got some real
questions about where we're going to fire, the
coach or not. We've got some questions on the board
here. Some want to keep him. And Bill basically
said, if you don't fire him, you've got to get rid of
me. I'll never forget that. It got kind of tense.
Tom Adair was there, someone else. We were in
Bill's office because the head of the Board of
Regents at the time knew we had to do something, but
they didn't want to let him go because they had so
much pressure from former students. And Bill took
a real strong stand on that, and I respected him for
it, even though, hey, Sheryl was a great football
coach. Cheryl turned around our phobia about
orange and white. We now can beat the University of
Texas. Before that, we didn't think we could. Did
the Athletic Council have any knowledge of
whether or not there were some violations under
Cheryl? We did. We did. I remember our group. I had a
little subcommittee with some of the best faculty
on campus, and we said, don't play a young man named
Flowers from Bryan. Arkansas beat us 28 to nothing
up in the hills. Next thing I know, Flowers is
playing.
Then we had a little meeting with the associate
dean of agriculture, education, and others,
where a lot of the players were, worrying about
eligibility. And I'll never forget this. The
great associate dean of agriculture, been there
for years. Potts. It was his associate,
gray-headed guy. I think he's out of that role now.
Not R.C. Potts? No, Potts was the dean. You know who
I'm talking about. Tremendous with students.
Curtis Lard? No. Not Murray Milford? Not Murray.
He was there for a long, long time. Well, he and
Brian Cole and another associate dean sitting
around the table with me chairing that committee,
and Cheryl says, Let me tell you something. I can
interview a young man and tell you whether he's
going to make it or not. I don't have to worry about
some of these test scores and other things. When
I'm recruiting a kid, I know who can make it or not.
And I'm not sure you guys can. And I said, Coach
Sherrill, you're looking at two people right here
who have saved more kids than Jesus Christ. They do
know kids. And I said, that's not the way to
approach it. And then we knew Flowers was playing.
Then we knew the Smith thing came out of Georgia.
And then he was gone. Yeah, he violated. Because
Bill Mobley handled it rather courageously,
didn't he? He did, very courageously. Very much
so, because I'm not kidding you. The head of the
Board of Regents says, we want to keep him. He says,
you keep him, I'm gone. That's the impression I
had. Well, that's what we heard that day in that
office. And this was on a weekend. It was on a
Friday. That's what I thought. It was on a Friday.
And, you know, my memory's pretty good on that one
in terms of. Who else deserves athletic counsel
during that era? Who else deserves pats on the back
for standing up for the right? I think Tom Adair.
Tom is a solid citizen, man. He wants to win, but Tom
has been the conscience, I think, of the Athletic
Council for 15 years. That's what I thought. Yeah.
To the typist, you don't need to put this in the
final version, but I suggested Tom to Jarvis
Miller to be added to the committee. there was a
vacancy and they needed somebody from science.
And they said, who do you think? And I said, I think
that Tom, he's a good solid faculty member, good
scholar. He's interested in athletics, but he's
not going to sell out. That's right. That's right.
And that's. So he had me, he and Frank Vandiver had
me write a concept paper. We started getting a lot
of pressure from soccer and lacrosse and rugby.
And they had me write a concept paper on what club
sports are versus what they got to do to earn their
way in. And Tom then took that, you know, trusting
me completely, took that to Vandiver, and that's
how women's soccer became a Division I sport
because they followed the rules. Rugby kept
drinking the beer and raising a little hell here,
you know, fighting here, but wearing A&M
uniforms. Boy, the soccer women, they got it in
line and played good competition and became a
varsity sport. And... Vandiver did so much for
this university that I think the people never
really gave him credit for. For a second, or a
little longer than a second, describe your
impression of Chuck Sampson as Athletic Council
Chairman. Chuck was so thorough, such a
gentleman, had been a varsity tennis player at
Notre Dame, so he knew competition. We all knew and
respected him. I just see where he got the highest
honor in Texas for an engineering profession. He
knew his stuff. He loved athletics, but yet
integrity was what... That's written all over
Chuck Sampson, and you could just see it, and it
prevailed, I think, with that athletic council.
People accuse me of being a former athlete, of
getting in bed with the athletics, but no, not at
all, because I knew we had to have the kind of
integrity that... We needed, because after
having Bear Bryant years behind us and some other
black marks that we shouldn't have had, I should
say ugly marks, we were trying to make it right. Did
any coach or politician or board member ever try to
influence your vote on the council? They did when
Jackie Sherrill came in here. I wasn't ready to
hire him from my perspective. It was done without
our wishes. The Board of Regents brought him in
here over our wishes. Did anybody call you or write
you about Bill McKenzie talked with me. He said,
isn't he a good one, John? You know, we need to move
into the next level. So, yeah, there was some
pressure. I don't know whether pressure for the
other people, but Bill Romaine, I guess, went to
his grave angry over firing Tom Wilson. Tom had had
an 8-2 year, but people said, oh, he's not tough
enough. He couldn't be. We need to go after big
time. And Tom never really forgave us, even though
he sent players here. went on to win a state high
school title. Did any coach ever try to twist your
arm? Not really, not really. I didn't teach
undergraduates. I remember at times I was asked by
a basketball coach for some courses to get some
kids in so they could stay eligible. But there
wasn't any of that on the football side, RC
especially. And I just really didn't get to know
Emory that well since I'd just come on at the end of
his time. But, no, there's never been an instant.
Your perception of Marvin Tate as the athletic
director during that period? I think Marvin Tate
was so good. Articulate spokesperson, had been in
business world, I don't know why. I guess over the
coaching change and Tom Wilson thing, there was
something I never really understood. But Marvin
didn't last long after the Jackie Sherrill. We
wound up with Jackie wanting to be both AD and head
coach. Then, of course, John David Crowe came in
and did that. I think Marvin probably got a bad
deal. I thought he was very articulate. I thought
he knew sports. He loved A&M. I never understood
that one very well. Now, did he survive the
Sherrill dismissal? Yeah, he survived that, but
then he was gone as soon as, you know, he was gone
soon after that. Okay. Yeah. Because he wound up
being sort of the associate Athletic director to
Cheryl, see.
Does R.C. follow Cheryl? Yeah. Were you on the
council when he was selected as head coach?
I'm trying to think. I don't think so. I'd just gone
off. Okay. Because that would have been about 1986
or 678.
I went off in 88. Okay. It would have been about that
time. Yeah, about that time. I remember how elated
I was when they appointed R.C. because I knew What a
good person he was, yeah. Typist, this is not for
inclusion. I'm just sharing an anecdote with him.
One of the interesting things coming up, Bob
Stull, who is the AD at UTEP, did I tell you the
relation between him and R.C.? No, I know the name
Stull, though. All right. They were half-time,
beginning, first-year assistant, assistant
coaches at Kansas State. Is that right? Years ago.
I remember that. And one night, after some cool
beverages, they did a handshake agreement that if
either one of them ever became a head coach, he'd
hire the other one. Then after that job, their
first full-time assistant job was at Kent State,
and Dick Tamburo... was the assistant athletic
director. And the man who would later be the very,
very, very fine head coach for the Washington
Huskies, whose name escapes me right now. I don't
know who you're talking about. He was their head
coach. Yeah. And a guy who had later owned the El
Paso Diablos very successful baseball franchise
was a first-year intern sports information
director. And so... Then when I hire Stull as a head
coach for the fall of 86. Yeah, yeah, I remember
that. He called RC and said, okay. I'll hire you.
And he said R.C. told him, no, there's some things
developing here that I might have a chance to be a
head coach here. I'll be darned. And so then when I
get to Missouri, Tamburo, I make him the A.D., then
he and I hire Stull. And so now Stull is back as A.D.
there, and he's going to play R.C. And another tiny
link, both R.C. and I went to Orange High School. I
knew you both went to Orange High School, yeah.
That's right. That's good. Let's see. Other
extracurricular tasks you had during all those
years? The primary, of course, was the athletic
council and the faculty senate. I was also elected
to the first executive committee of the faculty
senate. There were five of us. What did it do? It was
a titular head, really. I mean, we were the ones
that worked closely with the speaker. We then
oversaw the committees within the Senate. And it
was a pretty time-consuming thing. We got a lot of
things done. A core curriculum came out of that. A
lot of our faculty concerns, we began with
inclusion and minority issues for faculty,
recruiting faculty, changing the structure of
the department head from more of a chair approach
to more a decentralized approach. Paul Parrish
was on that. I'm trying to think of all the other
people on that. Bill Barzak was on the first. We had
to be elected by the faculty senate. And the woman
in biochemistry was on that. I can't think of her
name. And how often did the senate and the
executive committee meet? We met once a month,
once a month. The executive committee, of course,
met before the Faculty Senate met. About how many
on the Senate? There were about 80, yeah, roughly
about 80. The time you got some of the larger
colleges had four or five representatives. We had
two or three. And then we had, of course, the staff.
Might have been about 60, I guess, probably about
60. And were there some big, as you look back, Were
there some big issues that y'all were not able to
get anything, any action on? Our biggest issue was
we had to back off on some of the humanities courses
because of the so-called accreditation problems
of the College of Engineering. And there was some
consternation over that. Humanities? Yeah.
There was consternation of not having
well-educated engineers and the same battle that
goes on all the time. Those were some of the biggest
ones, I think, right there. The women issue of
feminism, those kinds of things are just
beginning to become present. And the lack of
discussion about lack of faculty, women faculty,
minority faculty. And I think it was a healthy kind
of beginning for, the fermentation was there, I
think, to begin making changes in the faces of our
faculty. All right. Vandiver, you gave him credit
for being sensitive as the president. What other
administrators do you think were faculty senate
sensitive? I think at that time we had our dean of
faculties who'd come out of the College of
Business. Clint Phillips. Clint. was very
supportive, I thought. And having Bill Barzak
involved, who had been through some of those
chairs, just having him as part of the faculty
senate was very helpful as well.
Looking back on it, those were some of the major
players, I think. There were a lot of people
opposed to the Faculty Senate. And what did your
colleagues think about your role? Well, they
thought that I should be able to, one, speak well
for the College of Education in terms of what our
disciplines are, what we're trying to do, and how
critical we are to the whole process. And they
figured that I was strong enough to be able to stand
up chin to chin with anybody in any discipline.
They expected me to do that. And I did my best to do
that as well. Did a department head or a dean ever
give you any counsel about your faculty senate
role? Not really. Because we had this
subcommittee within, I would call the caucus. And
we'd ask the dean if there's anything we needed to
fight for. One thing I did fight hard for, and I
still think it was a mistake, we needed a course in
the social sciences and education on what
education is all about in America. So every
undergraduate here who winds up on school boards
or supporting schools to understand what they
are, education as a discipline, what it is, and I
fought for that and tried to get it entered, and I
couldn't get enough support even within the
college because they didn't know who was going to
teach it. So I'm not for it unless my department.
That's right. That's right. And I thought it had
been a great idea. I remember fighting that with
two or three of them. Our caucus really thought
that made sense. You know, if you understand what
political science is about, once you understand
that education is the key to our country, why not
have a good, interesting, fascinating course,
not a boring course, on the politics and the
history of American education. So that was an
issue we fought on that I didn't win on. Now, you
said you're going to a 4 o'clock. Yeah, 4 o'clock.
What time do you want to take off? Ten more minutes,
I'm fine. Okay. When Frank Hubert became
chancellor, what happened in the college in terms
of leadership? Well, we started the search, and a
few of us were interested in becoming dean after
that because I was being invited to apply
elsewhere. And we had other candidates who were
qualified or better than I, but... We found Dean
Corrigan. He was dean at the University of
Maryland. He came in here and interviewed, and
everybody was very impressed with him. He was not
an authoritarian. He was a totally different
personality from Frank Hubert. As far as you
recall, was he the general favorite of the group?
Yes, very much so. He proved to be a really good
dean. He was more effective externally than he was
internally, in my opinion. He was working with
Ross Perot on a key committee to determine where we
went. We lost some ground there in terms of only 18
hours of education and lost a so-called education
major. But he fought hard on Perot on that one. He
did some good stuff with us in terms of inquiry
groups, doing a lot of interdisciplinary kinds of
things. But he was a kind, thoughtful, bright
person. who never embarrassed us in any way, and as
far as I know, never intimidated anybody like past
deans who will go unmentioned. After he left, we
had a bad situation here. We brought in a person, a
woman from University of Houston, Stallings. In
many ways, she was very divisive, and the college
almost, it was like, really it was a vote of no
confidence for her. Was there a real search? Not a
really good search, I think. We did a real search,
but somehow, and the people at the University of
Houston, she was department head down there, said
she wasn't an administrator. But she had a lot of
federal grants, had a big name, and the provost
wanted somebody who could bring in money to the
college like other colleges do. Which provost?
McDonnell. McDonnell? Yeah. And she had a lot of
grants. Was there... Was there a perception that
there was a deliberate effort to hire a female? I
think so. And this was a good college to start in
since we tend to have a lot of women in the program. I
don't think there's any question about that. And
she had the name. Hold her on the scholarship. But
from the get-go, she was not an administrator and
didn't understand how to be an administrator. and
almost tore the college apart. She lasted how
long? Three years. Two, really. Now, Dean
Corrigan ceased being dean. Why? He was just ready
to do something else. He got the Harrington chair,
you know, is in our department, and I think he just,
he was tired. Because there certainly was no
dissatisfaction. There was no dissatisfaction,
not at all, except for us losing that power base
across the state. We'll never understand why we
didn't have enough influence and why he didn't
have enough influence with his name and with his
prestige. And I think in many ways he may have felt
like that he may have disappointed some of us. But I
don't think in terms of our wishing he would step
out, there was none of that. But man, there was with
Stallings from the get-go. Then following her.
Station-wide search. I went back on Stallings. We
had a guy hired named Miller from Missouri. I think
his name's Miller. He was either dean at the
University of Missouri at the time or had been at
the University of Missouri. I think that's right.
Yeah. We had him hired. But the provost said no. We
don't want him. He had sort of an industrial arts
vocational background. And then she gets the job.
And that made a lot of people mad because they'd
gone through the search. Jane came to us, having
not been a dean, been an associate dean, Jane
Connolly. But wait, following Stallings, is Jane
Connolly next? Yeah. Jane, Jane. It was a problem
with some of us getting the right name. She came in
without experience, having been an
administrator, but a good scholar. And this is
about when? That's been four years ago. Okay. Some
of us had concern because of being an Ed Psych type
who may not have the background link to make the
links. The problem is a lot of the Ed
Administration types don't want to be deans. They
just don't want to do that, and so the Ed Psych
people come in who aren't administrative
trained, who are not public school people
usually, and so we were a little leery about that.
But she's come in and she's done a wonderful job.
She's dealt with some tough issues. But I think
she's been very successful, much better
administrator, much better.
She, Stallings was trying in many ways to change
the gender balance too quickly. And Jane's come in
with people of color and gender and balanced them
really well. So that's the difference. One used a
hammer, one used a shoehorn.
Let's stop there. Okay.
August 31st.
John, some missed opportunities. Can you think of
any missed opportunities that this college might
have taken advantage of? Yes. I think the effort
coming out of the land-grant tradition of really
becoming a service institution as well as a
research-based institution, I think in the
spirit of this university really, this college,
trying to be so careful about modeling the liberal
arts and science colleges in terms of its type of
scholarship. I truly believe that we've had
several opportunities to truly become a service
university for the state of Texas and the nation.
We have outstanding researchers. We've done some
wonderful things in collaboration with schools.
We started here under Dean Corrigan, an inquiry
group, and started working with school systems to
set up a research collaborative. Well, that went
by the wayside when Corrigan left. And the whole
idea on being a reservoir of creating knowledge.
opposed
to really emphasizing the service elements and
helping the schools especially urban schools
let's call them to the wayside that we're doing a
lot of new things but we're just now trying to
recover from that because we so i think in the long
run as a professional school we may have lost
something lost some opportunities that uh not to
make you recover but there's some there's still
some damage i think
um i think And one
of
the efforts we tried to, I think, reach out in the
late 80s, our department dr erlinson and i worked
together to create a one of the first cohort
doctoral programs in the country that was really
workable where we looked at the edd program people
who could not come in full-time for residency and
actually build a cohort where we select them
together from the school district and each of
those people not only working doctors they were
contributing into the school district and we
built some tremendous liaisons in fact we hired
the superintendent from San Antonio gave these
fees to be on our clinical faculty.
so-called
And
I'm meeting
this next week with the gentlemen from Richardson
Foundation. They've asked me to take on this
challenge of developing a document for the future
of superintendents in Texas in a time of great
change where superintendents are aging and where
schools and universities have to build a bridge.
And I've written a piece, I think I told you last
week, We
want
to be highly productive. We want to produce
in the journals that are seen scholarly. Not
the way I would like it to happen. Yeah,
we've got partnerships. We've got
public school, university liaisons going of all
kinds. But in terms of a financial commitment, in
terms of a state political commitment, no. We're
still K-12 and higher ed, and don't let those funds
get mixed up.
I think probably University of North Texas. is
really,
come on, that's
gonna do these big things in the Metroplex. I think
UT Arlington. UT Arlington has a wonderful
national program. They've got the British
Foundation of Money, and they actually have a
superintendent in their entire area, so that's a
big star, and give them a full-time paid
internship, and you do your degree through the UTA
program there. That is a wonderful program. I
think, probably, Thank
you.